README.md, before:

# Flow Control with Sliding window protocol

This project implements a **reliable file transfer protocol** built on top of the **User Datagram Protocol (UDP)**. It utilizes the **Selective Repeat with NAK** algorithm for flow control and error management. The User Interface (UI) is structured as a Terminal GUI application (TUI) using the **Textual** library.

## 🎯 Project Goal

The main objective is to demonstrate the ability to construct a virtual "reliable connection" over a fundamentally unreliable transport layer (UDP). This makes it suitable for applications requiring speed and fine-grained control over retransmissions.

---

## 📦 Packet Structure (Message Format)

All communications between the Client and Server use a strictly defined packet structure (UDP datagrams):

| Field               | Size                      | Description                                                           |
|:--------------------|:--------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **PACKET\_TYPE**    | 1 char ( 1 byte )         | Identifies the packet's overall purpose (Operation, ACK, Data, etc.). |
| **OPERATION\_TYPE** | 1 char ( 1 byte )         | Details the specific operation or state (Upload, ACK, etc.).          |
| **SEQUENCE**        | int ( 4 bytes )           | Denotes packet order                                                  |
| **DATA**            | 512 varchar ( 512 bytes ) | The payload or supplementary information.                             |


### 1. PACKET\_TYPE Encoding

| PACKET\_TYPE     | Code | Description                                               |
|:-----------------| :--- |:----------------------------------------------------------|
| Operation        | `0` | A packet that initiates an action (e.g., Upload, Delete). |
| ACK              | `1` | Acknowledgment response.                                  |
| Data             | `2` | A packet carrying the actual file data.                   |
| End transmission | `3` | Signals the end of a sequence of packets (a frame).       |

### 2. OPERATION_TYPE Encoding

This field is interpreted based on the preceding `PACKET_TYPE`:

| Context                       | OPERATION_TYPE | Code | Description |
|-------------------------------|----------------|------|-------------|
| **PACKET_TYPE 0 (Operation)** | Upload | 00   | Initiates a file upload. |
|                               | Download | 01   | Initiates a file download. |
|                               | Delete | 02   | Requests file deletion. |
|                               | Move | 03   | Requests file movement. |
|                               | Sliding Window settings | 04   | Used to configure sliding window parameters. |
| **PACKET_TYPE 1 (ACK)**       | ACK | 10   | Confirms successful receipt of a packet. |
| **PACKET_TYPE 2 (Data)**      | Data | 20   | Data packet. The first character of the DATA field **must be the packet's sequence number**. |

## 🚀 Client Protocol Documentation

This section describes the sequence of `Message` packets sent by the client for various operations, including file transfer and connection settings.

The message structure is `Message(PacketType, SequenceNumber, Data)`.

---

### 📥 Core Operations

| Operation | Packet Sequence                                       | Description | Example Data Format |
| :--- |:------------------------------------------------------| :--- |:--------------------|
| **Upload** | 0. `Message(PacketType.UPLOAD, 0, "")`                | Initiates the upload process. | N/A                 |
| | 1. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 1, file_name)`           | Sends the name of the file. | `file_name`         |
| | 2. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 2, file_content[0])`     | Sends the first chunk of file content. | `file_content[0]`   |
| | ...                                                   | ... | ...                 |
| | n+1. `Message(PacketType.DATA, n+1, file_content[n])` | Sends the last chunk of file content. | `file_content[n]`   |
| **Download** | 0. `Message(PacketType.DOWNLOAD, 0, "")`              | Requests a file download. | N/A                 |
| | 1. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 1, file_name)`           | Specifies the file to download. | `file_name`         |
| **Delete** | 0. `Message(PacketType.DELETE, 0, "")`                | Requests file deletion. | N/A                 |
| | 1. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 1, file_name)`           | Specifies the file to delete. | `file_name`         |
| **Move** | 0. `Message(PacketType.MOVE, 0, "")`                  | Requests a file move/rename. | N/A                 |
| | 1. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 1, file_format)`         | Specifies the source and destination paths. | `file_format`       |

---

### ⚙️ Sliding Window Settings

To configure the underlying communication mechanism the following sequence is used:

| Packet Sequence | Purpose | Data Format Specification | Example |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1. `Message(PacketType.SETTINGS, 0, "")` | Initiates the settings configuration. | N/A | N/A |
| 2. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 1, window_format)` | Sets the **window size**. | `window_format := window_size(int)=val(int)` | `window_size(int)=12` |
| 3. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 2, timeout_format)` | Sets the **retransmission timeout**. | `timeout_format := timeout(float)=val(float)` | `timeout(float)=0.3123` |

---

### 📝 Format Definitions

* **Move Format:**
    > `file_format := src|dst`
    > (e.g. `/home/user/oldfile.txt|/home/user/new_location/newfile.txt`)

* **Window Size Format:**
    > `window_format := window_size(int)=val(int)`
    > (e.g. `window_size(int)=12`)

* **Timeout Format:**
    > `timeout_format := timeout(float)=val(float)`
    > (e.g. `timeout(float)=0.3123`)

### Example Packet Exchange (Fragment)

A message split into multiple packets is sent by the Server, and the Client responds with ACK packets:

| Source | Packet (Format) | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Server** | `001laurentiu are dreptate\0...` | `0` (Op) + `0` (Upload) + `1` (Seq. Nr) + Data |
| **Client** | `111\0...` | `1` (ACK) + `1` (ACK) + `1` (ACK for Seq. Nr 1) |

---
# User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
![UDP](images/UDP-gif.gif)
## 🌐 Overview

**User Datagram Protocol (UDP)** is a **Transport Layer protocol** within the Internet Protocol (IP) suite.  
It provides **fast**, **connectionless**, and **lightweight** communication between processes running on networked systems.

Unlike TCP, UDP does **not** guarantee:
- Delivery of packets  
- Order of packets  
- Error checking or correction  

This makes UDP ideal for **real-time** and **time-sensitive** applications, where **speed** is more important than reliability.

---

## ⚙️ Key Characteristics

| Feature | Description |
|----------|--------------|
| **Connectionless** | No connection setup before sending data. Each packet (datagram) is sent independently. |
| **Unreliable Delivery** | Packets may be lost, duplicated, or received out of order. |
| **No Congestion Control** | UDP sends data as fast as the application allows, without rate limiting. |
| **Low Latency** | Minimal protocol overhead makes it ideal for fast communication. |
| **Checksum Field** | Optional integrity check for detecting errors in transmission. |

---
## ⚙️ Flow Control

The project utilizes the **Sliding Window Protocol** specifically implemented as **Selective Repeat**.

* **Selective Repeat:** Only lost or corrupted packets are retransmitte, not the entire window.
* **Settings:** Parameters like the **window size** and **Timeout** interval are configurable via the Server UI.

---

## 💻 User Interfaces (TUI - Terminal UI)

The application uses **Textual** to provide an interactive experience within the terminal.

### Client UI

* **START:** Initializes the connection and displays the operation options.
* **Operations:** `UPLOAD`, `DOWNLOAD`, `DELETE`, `MOVE FILE`.
* **Workflow:** Allows file selection from a local file explorer, receiving the file hierarchy from the server, and sending the updated file structure after moving/deleting files.
* **Processing:** Displays progress status and logs of sent/received packets.

### Server UI

* **START SERVER:** Begins the UDP listening service.
* **SETTINGS:** Allows dynamic configuration of:
    * `size of window` (the size of the sliding window).
    * `Timeout` (the interval before a packet is considered lost and retransmitted).
* **PROCESS DATA:** Displays the activity log, received packets, and the status of ongoing transfer sessions.

---

## 🛠️ Installation and Running

## Prerequisites

Make sure you have **Python 3.11+** installed.  
You can check your Python version by running:

```bash
python --version
```

---

## Setup Instructions

1. **Clone the repository**

```bash
git clone https://github.com/TUIASI-AC-IoT/proiectrcp2025-biteater
cd proiectrcp2025-biteater
```

2. **Create a virtual environment (recommended)**

```bash
python -m venv venv
```

3. **Activate the virtual environment**

- On **Windows**:

```bash
venv\Scripts\activate
```

- On **macOS / Linux**:

```bash
source venv/bin/activate
```

4. **Install dependencies**

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
pip install textual-dev
```

5. **Run the application**

Normal mode:

```bash
textual run main.py
```

To enter the developer mode (with print statements, events displayed and live css updates):

a. **Run in terminal 1**

```bash
textual console
```


b. **Run in terminal 2**

```bash
textual run --dev main.py
```

The console is going to only listen to events happening in terminal 2 

---


## Troubleshooting

- If you get errors about missing packages:

```bash
pip install textual
```

## Interactiunea dintre clasa Sender si Server
![Diagrama Arhitecturii](images/sender-server.png)
## Client-Server Port Communication
```mermaid
flowchart LR
    %% Stiluri pentru noduri
    classDef client stroke:#01579b,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef server stroke:#4a148c,stroke-width:2px;

    subgraph CLIENT_SIDE [CLIENT]
        direction TB
        C_Sender("Sender<br>(Ascultă: 5000)<br>(Trimite către: 6000)"):::client
        C_Receiver("Receiver<br>(Ascultă: 7000)<br>(Trimite către: 8000)"):::client
    end

    subgraph SERVER_SIDE [SERVER]
        direction TB
        S_Sender("Sender<br>(Ascultă: 8000)<br>(Trimite către: 7000)"):::server
        S_Receiver("Receiver<br>(Ascultă: 6000)<br>(Trimite către: 5000)"):::server
    end

    %% Conexiunile (Săgețile din desen)
    %% Client Sender trimite la Server Receiver pe 6000
    C_Sender -- Port 6000 --> S_Receiver
    
    %% Server Receiver răspunde la Client Sender pe 5000
    S_Receiver -- Port 5000 --> C_Sender

    %% Server Sender trimite la Client Receiver pe 7000
    S_Sender -- Port 7000 --> C_Receiver

    %% Client Receiver răspunde la Server Sender pe 8000
    C_Receiver -- Port 8000 --> S_Sender
```
## Resources

- [UDP](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/computer-networks/user-datagram-protocol-udp/)
- [Textual Documentation](https://textual.textualize.io/)
- [Textual GitHub Repository](https://github.com/Textualize/textual)

Commit message:

UI for the client, operation for hierarchy, update readme.md

README.md, after:

# Flow Control with Sliding window protocol

This project implements a **reliable file transfer protocol** built on top of the **User Datagram Protocol (UDP)**. It utilizes the **Selective Repeat with NAK** algorithm for flow control and error management. The User Interface (UI) is structured as a Terminal GUI application (TUI) using the **Textual** library.

## 🎯 Project Goal

The main objective is to demonstrate the ability to construct a virtual "reliable connection" over a fundamentally unreliable transport layer (UDP). This makes it suitable for applications requiring speed and fine-grained control over retransmissions.

---

## 📦 Packet Structure (Message Format)

All communications between the Client and Server use a strictly defined packet structure (UDP datagrams):

| Field               | Size                      | Description                                                           |
|:--------------------|:--------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **PACKET\_TYPE**    | 1 char ( 1 byte )         | Identifies the packet's overall purpose (Operation, ACK, Data, etc.). |
| **OPERATION\_TYPE** | 1 char ( 1 byte )         | Details the specific operation or state (Upload, ACK, etc.).          |
| **SEQUENCE**        | int ( 4 bytes )           | Denotes packet order                                                  |
| **DATA**            | 512 varchar ( 512 bytes ) | The payload or supplementary information.                             |


### 1. PACKET\_TYPE Encoding

| PACKET\_TYPE     | Code | Description                                               |
|:-----------------| :--- |:----------------------------------------------------------|
| Operation        | `0` | A packet that initiates an action (e.g., Upload, Delete). |
| ACK              | `1` | Acknowledgment response.                                  |
| Data             | `2` | A packet carrying the actual file data.                   |
| End transmission | `3` | Signals the end of a sequence of packets (a frame).       |

### 2. OPERATION_TYPE Encoding

This field is interpreted based on the preceding `PACKET_TYPE`:

| Context                       | OPERATION_TYPE | Code | Description |
|-------------------------------|----------------|------|-------------|
| **PACKET_TYPE 0 (Operation)** | Upload | 00   | Initiates a file upload. |
|                               | Download | 01   | Initiates a file download. |
|                               | Delete | 02   | Requests file deletion. |
|                               | Move | 03   | Requests file movement. |
|                               | Sliding Window settings | 04   | Used to configure sliding window parameters. |
 |                               | Get Hierarchy | 05 | Request file hierarchy |
| **PACKET_TYPE 1 (ACK)**       | ACK | 10   | Confirms successful receipt of a packet. |
| **PACKET_TYPE 2 (Data)**      | Data | 20   | Data packet. The first character of the DATA field **must be the packet's sequence number**. |

## 🚀 Client Protocol Documentation

This section describes the sequence of `Message` packets sent by the client for various operations, including file transfer and connection settings.

The message structure is `Message(PacketType, SequenceNumber, Data)`.

---

### 📥 Core Operations

| Operation | Packet Sequence                                       | Description | Example Data Format |
| :--- |:------------------------------------------------------| :--- |:--------------------|
| **Upload** | 0. `Message(PacketType.UPLOAD, 0, "")`                | Initiates the upload process. | N/A                 |
| | 1. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 1, file_name)`           | Sends the name of the file. | `file_name`         |
| | 2. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 2, file_content[0])`     | Sends the first chunk of file content. | `file_content[0]`   |
| | ...                                                   | ... | ...                 |
| | n+1. `Message(PacketType.DATA, n+1, file_content[n])` | Sends the last chunk of file content. | `file_content[n]`   |
| **Download** | 0. `Message(PacketType.DOWNLOAD, 0, "")`              | Requests a file download. | N/A                 |
| | 1. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 1, file_name)`           | Specifies the file to download. | `file_name`         |
| **Delete** | 0. `Message(PacketType.DELETE, 0, "")`                | Requests file deletion. | N/A                 |
| | 1. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 1, file_name)`           | Specifies the file to delete. | `file_name`         |
| **Move** | 0. `Message(PacketType.MOVE, 0, "")`                  | Requests a file move/rename. | N/A                 |
| | 1. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 1, file_format)`         | Specifies the source and destination paths. | `file_format`       |
| **Get Hierarchy** | 0. `Message(PacketType.HIERARCHY, 0, "")` | Request file hierarchy | |
---

### ⚙️ Sliding Window Settings

To configure the underlying communication mechanism the following sequence is used:

| Packet Sequence | Purpose | Data Format Specification | Example |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1. `Message(PacketType.SETTINGS, 0, "")` | Initiates the settings configuration. | N/A | N/A |
| 2. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 1, window_format)` | Sets the **window size**. | `window_format := window_size(int)=val(int)` | `window_size(int)=12` |
| 3. `Message(PacketType.DATA, 2, timeout_format)` | Sets the **retransmission timeout**. | `timeout_format := timeout(float)=val(float)` | `timeout(float)=0.3123` |

---

### 📝 Format Definitions

* **Window Size Format:**
    > `window_format := window_size(int)=val(int)`
    > (e.g. `window_size(int)=12`)

* **Timeout Format:**
    > `timeout_format := timeout(float)=val(float)`
    > (e.g. `timeout(float)=0.3123`)

### Example Packet Exchange (Fragment)

A message split into multiple packets is sent by the Server, and the Client responds with ACK packets:

| Source | Packet (Format) | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Server** | `001laurentiu are dreptate\0...` | `0` (Op) + `0` (Upload) + `1` (Seq. Nr) + Data |
| **Client** | `111\0...` | `1` (ACK) + `1` (ACK) + `1` (ACK for Seq. Nr 1) |

---
# User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
![UDP](images/UDP-gif.gif)
## 🌐 Overview

**User Datagram Protocol (UDP)** is a **Transport Layer protocol** within the Internet Protocol (IP) suite.  
It provides **fast**, **connectionless**, and **lightweight** communication between processes running on networked systems.

Unlike TCP, UDP does **not** guarantee:
- Delivery of packets  
- Order of packets  
- Error checking or correction  

This makes UDP ideal for **real-time** and **time-sensitive** applications, where **speed** is more important than reliability.

---

## ⚙️ Key Characteristics

| Feature | Description |
|----------|--------------|
| **Connectionless** | No connection setup before sending data. Each packet (datagram) is sent independently. |
| **Unreliable Delivery** | Packets may be lost, duplicated, or received out of order. |
| **No Congestion Control** | UDP sends data as fast as the application allows, without rate limiting. |
| **Low Latency** | Minimal protocol overhead makes it ideal for fast communication. |
| **Checksum Field** | Optional integrity check for detecting errors in transmission. |

---
## ⚙️ Flow Control

The project utilizes the **Sliding Window Protocol** specifically implemented as **Selective Repeat**.

* **Selective Repeat:** Only lost or corrupted packets are retransmitted, not the entire window.
* **Settings:** Parameters like the **window size** and **Timeout** interval are configurable via the Server UI.

---

## 💻 User Interfaces (TUI - Terminal UI)

The application uses **Textual** to provide an interactive experience within the terminal.

### Client UI

* **START:** Initializes the connection and displays the operation options.
* **Operations:** `UPLOAD`, `DOWNLOAD`, `DELETE`, `MOVE FILE`, `SETTINGS`, `GET HIERARCHY`.
* **Workflow:** Allows file selection from a local file explorer, receiving the file hierarchy from the server, and sending the updated file structure after moving/deleting files.
* **Processing:** Displays progress status and logs of sent/received packets.

### Server UI

* **START SERVER:** Begins the UDP listening service.
* **SETTINGS:** Allows dynamic configuration of:
    * `size of window` (the size of the sliding window).
    * `Timeout` (the interval before a packet is considered lost and retransmitted).
* **PROCESS DATA:** Displays the activity log, received packets, and the status of ongoing transfer sessions.

---

## 🛠️ Installation and Running

## Prerequisites

Make sure you have **Python 3.11+** installed.  
You can check your Python version by running:

```bash
python --version
```

---

## Setup Instructions

1. **Clone the repository**

```bash
git clone https://github.com/TUIASI-AC-IoT/proiectrcp2025-biteater
cd proiectrcp2025-biteater
```

2. **Create a virtual environment (recommended)**

```bash
python -m venv venv
```

3. **Activate the virtual environment**

- On **Windows**:

```bash
venv\Scripts\activate
```

- On **macOS / Linux**:

```bash
source venv/bin/activate
```

4. **Install dependencies**

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
pip install textual-dev
```

5. **Run the application on web**

Normal mode:

```bash
textual serve Client.py
```

### To enter the developer mode (with print statements, events displayed and live css updates): ###

a. **Run in terminal 1**

```bash
textual console -x EVENTS -x SYSTEM
```


b. **Run in terminal 2**

```bash
textual serve --dev Client.py
```

The console is going to only listen to events happening in terminal 2 

---


## Troubleshooting

- If you get errors about missing packages:

```bash
pip install textual
```

## Interactiunea dintre clasa Sender si Server
![Diagrama Arhitecturii](images/sender-server.png)
## Client-Server Port Communication
```mermaid
flowchart LR
    %% Stiluri pentru noduri
    classDef client stroke:#01579b,stroke-width:2px;
    classDef server stroke:#4a148c,stroke-width:2px;

    subgraph CLIENT_SIDE [CLIENT]
        direction TB
        C_Sender("Sender<br>(Ascultă: 5000)<br>(Trimite către: 6000)"):::client
        C_Receiver("Receiver<br>(Ascultă: 7000)<br>(Trimite către: 8000)"):::client
    end

    subgraph SERVER_SIDE [SERVER]
        direction TB
        S_Sender("Sender<br>(Ascultă: 8000)<br>(Trimite către: 7000)"):::server
        S_Receiver("Receiver<br>(Ascultă: 6000)<br>(Trimite către: 5000)"):::server
    end

    %% Conexiunile (Săgețile din desen)
    %% Client Sender trimite la Server Receiver pe 6000
    C_Sender -- Port 6000 --> S_Receiver
    
    %% Server Receiver răspunde la Client Sender pe 5000
    S_Receiver -- Port 5000 --> C_Sender

    %% Server Sender trimite la Client Receiver pe 7000
    S_Sender -- Port 7000 --> C_Receiver

    %% Client Receiver răspunde la Server Sender pe 8000
    C_Receiver -- Port 8000 --> S_Sender
```
## Resources

- [UDP](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/computer-networks/user-datagram-protocol-udp/)
- [Textual Documentation](https://textual.textualize.io/)
- [Textual GitHub Repository](https://github.com/Textualize/textual)
